[Event "Hastings"]
[Site "Hastings ENG"]
[Date "1895.08.13"]
[EventDate "1895.08.05"]
[Round "7"]
[Result "1/2-1/2"]
[White "David Janowski"]
[Black "James Mason"]
[ECO "C42"]
[WhiteElo "?"]
[BlackElo "?"]
[PlyCount "108"]

1.e4 {Notes by S. Tinsley} e5 2.Nf3 Nf6 3.Nxe5 d6 {Is it
necessary --probably it is-- to explain, for the benefit of
the uninitiated, that Black must not play Nxe4 at once? The
reply would be Qe2 with a very agreeable attack, if not a
winning game.} 4.Nf3 Nxe4 5.d4 d5 {Sanctioned by many
authorities recently. But we have heard much about never
moving a Piece twice in the opening. It is necessary, however,
to play d5 to prevent White’s Nd5, to support the Kt at e4,
and to play Bd6.} 6.Bd3 Be7 {Bd6 has much in its favour.}
7.O-O Nd7 8.c4 Nef6 9.cxd5 Nxd5 10.Nc3 N7f6 11.Re1 c6 12.Bg5
Be6 13.Ne5 O-O 14.Nxd5 {The special point, if any, involved in
a mere exchange of a minor Piece in such a position is
difficult to discover. And there is this forcible objection to
it, that the game soon tends to dulness and becomes
unattractive to what is best described as the gallery.} Bxd5
15.Bc2 Re8 16.Qd3 g6 17.Qh3 Nh5 18.Be3 {The Bishop is retained
in order to keep the Knight out. By exchanging, a 'hole' would
be open for that Piece at f4.} Bg5 19.Qg4 Bxe3 20.fxe3
{White’s somewhat weak Queen’s Pawn is now supported and the
game seems quite even.} Be6 21.Qe2 Qg5 22.Rf1 Rad8 23.Bb3
{Unless White saw the whole combination at starting this is
surprising at first sight. The White Bishop is valuable and is
in excellent play, and a doubled Pawn is the result of the
text move. Moreover, his weak King’s Pawn needed support, and
the immediate effect of White’s combination is unfavourableto
him. Or, possibly, White overlooked that after e4, Black could
check at e3 and capture that Pawn safely. The position is
highly interesting at his point, which forms the crux of the
game.} Bxb3 24.axb3 f6 25.Qc4+ Rd5 { It is necessary to
interpose the Rook. Otherwise, 25...Kg7 26 Qf7+ Kh8 27 Qxe8+
Rxe8 29 Nf7+ regaining tile Queen and presumably winning
easily.} 26.e4 Qe3+ 27.Kh1 Qxe4 28.Rae1 Qxd4 29.Nxc6 Rxe1 {One
of the most exciting positions in the Tournament is now
presented, Black’s weakness of course being the unprotected
Rook at e8. Practically all this is forced. If Black play
instead Qxc4, then 30 Rxe8+ Kf7 31 bxc4 and wins.} 30.Nxd4
Rxf1+ 31.Qxf1 Rxd4 32.g3 Rd7 33.g4 Ng7 34.Qxf6 b6 35.Kg2 Rd2+
36.Kg3 Re2 37.h3 Re6 38.Qf4 a5 39.Kh4 h5 40.Kg5 Rc6 41.Qf3 Re6
42.Kh6 hxg4 43.Qa8+ {Whether on its merits white’s game is a
winning one is a moot point, anyhow the check is not
opportune. The impression produced by the latter part of the
game is that White a little underestimated his opponent's
splendid defensive powers with the material at his
disposal. In one word, White probably expected an easy win.}
Ne8 44.Qc8 Kf7 45.Qd7+ Kf6 46.hxg4 Ke5 47.Kg5 Nd6 48.Qc7 Kd5
49.Kf4 Rf6+ 50.Ke3 Re6+ 51.Kd3 Ne8 52.Qf7 Kd6 53.Kd4 Nc7
54.Qf4+ Kd7 1/2-1/2