[Event "Bugojno 3rd"]
[Site "Bugojno YUG"]
[Date "1982.05.??"]
[EventDate "?"]
[Round "3"]
[Result "1-0"]
[White "Garry Kasparov"]
[Black "Miguel Najdorf"]
[ECO "E12"]
[WhiteElo "?"]
[BlackElo "?"]
[PlyCount "49"]

1.d4 {Noted by Eric Schiller.} Nf6 2.c4 e6 3.Nf3 b6 4.a3 {
4.Nc3 Bb4 5.Bg5 Bb7 6.e3 h6 7.Bh4 is also popular, but after
capturing at c3, Black gets counterplay. Bxc3+ [ 7...g5 8.Bg3
Ne4 9.Qc2 Bxc3+ 10.bxc3 d6 11.Bd3 f5 12.d5 Nc5 13.h4 g4 14.Nd4
Qf6 15.O-O Nxd3 16.Qxd3 and White was better in a game from
the Kasparov vs. Timman match in 1985. ] 8.bxc3 d6 9.Nd2 g5
10.Bg3 Qe7 11.a4 a5 12.h4 Rg8 13.hxg5 hxg5 and Black had a
fine game in game 18 of the 1986 Kasparov vs. Karpov World
Championship match. } Bb7 { 4...c5 is less effective. A good
example is Kasparov's crushing defeats of Van der Wiel and
Fedorowicz at the 1981 World Youth Team Championship. 5.d5 Ba6
6.Qc2 Qe7 [ 6...exd5 7.cxd5 g6 8.Nc3 Bg7 9.g3 O-O 10.Bg2 d6
11.O-O Re8 12.Re1 Qc7 13.Bf4 Nh5 14.Bd2 Nd7 15.Qa4 Bb7 16.Qh4
a6 17.Rac1 b5 18.b4 Qd8 19.Bg5 f6 20.Bd2 f5 21.Bg5 Qb6 22.e4
cxb4 23.axb4 Rac8 24.Be3 Qd8 25.Bg5 Qb6 As team captain, I was
very worried here, seeing the Black pieces drift away from the
kingside. I had no idea how Kasparov would do it, but I
expected a breakthrough soon. 26.exf5 Rxe1+ 27.Rxe1 Bxc3
28.Re7 Rc4 29.Qh3 Bc8 30.fxg6 Ndf6 31.Bxf6 Nxf6 32.gxh7+ Kf8
33.h8=Q+ Kxe7 34.Qg7+ and Fedorowicz resigned. The American
team did manage to draw the match, thanks to a fine effort by
Joel Benjamin. ] 7.Bg5 exd5 8.Nc3 Bxc4 9.e4 h6 10.Bxf6 Qxf6
11.exd5 Bxf1 12.Kxf1 d6 13.Re1+ Be7 14.Ne4 Qg6 15.Qa4+ Kf8
16.h4 and Van der Wiel eventually lost. The kingside pressure
was just too much. } 5.Nc3 {This is the Kasparov vs. Petrosian
variation, though now it is usually just called the Kasparov
Variation, since he not only rehabilitate the line, but also
set a good example by racking up many points as White.} d5
{His opponent, the great Miguel Najdorf developer of the
Najdorf Variation of the Sicilian was not well prepared for
this event. He was supposed to be the arbiter, but when one of
the players couldn't make it the veteran gamely stepped
in. Still, he plays well in the opening, following the main
lines and improving on Petrosian's play. 5...Ne4 led to one of
the most famous games in the variation, played by Kasparov
against Ulf Andersson at the Tilburg Interpolis tournament of
1981. 6.Nxe4 Bxe4 7.Nd2 Bg6 8.g3 Nc6 9.e3 a6 10.b4 b5 11.cxb5
axb5 12.Bb2 Na7 13.h4 h6 14.d5 exd5 15.Bg2 c6 16.O-O f6 17.Re1
Be7 18.Qg4 Kf7 19.h5 Bh7 20.e4 ! dxe4 21.Bxe4 Bxe4 22.Nxe4 Nc8
23.Rad1 Ra7 24.Nxf6 gxf6 25.Qg6+ Kf8 26.Bc1 d5 27.Rd4 Nd6
28.Rg4 Nf7 29.Bxh6+ Ke8 30.Bg7 Andersson resigned. } 6.cxd5
Nxd5 {Black usually captures with the knight, at after
6...exd5 7.g3 White gets a superior position.} 7.e3 {Kasparov
has also been effective with 7.Qc2, especially against
Karpov. 7.Qc2 Nd7 8.Nxd5 exd5 9.Bg5 f6 10.Bf4 c5 11.g3 g6
12.h4 with a better position in game 41 of the 1984/85 World
Championship. } Be7 8.Bb5+ c6 9.Bd3 Nxc3 { 9...O-O 10.e4 Nxc3
11.bxc3 was better for White in Kasparov vs. Marjanovic, Banja
Luka Yugoslavia 1979. } 10.bxc3 c5 11.O-O Nc6 {This is an
attempt to improve on the simple castling, where White can get
an advantage via rapid development. 11...O-O 12.Qc2 g6 13.e4
Nc6 14.Bh6 and White had the advantage in Kasparov
vs. Petrosian, Moscow 1981. Kasparov later blundered away the
game in time pressure. } 12.e4 O-O 13.Be3 cxd4 14.cxd4 {White
has a good central position, but Black has no weaknesses.} Rc8
15.Qe2 Na5 16.Rfe1 {! Kasparov realizes that the e-pawn will
eventually need protection.} Qd6 { 16...Kh8 17.h4 Bxh4 18.Rad1
Be7 19.d5 Bc5 20.Bf4 led to a messy game in Kasparov
vs. Groszpeter, also from the 1981 World Youth Team
championship. } 17.d5 {! A strong positional pawn sacrifice.}
exd5 18.e5 Qe6 19.Nd4 {!} Qxe5 20.Nf5 {White has plenty of
compensation for the pawn, with active pieces and attacking
changes on the kingside. Black's queenside forces are out of
play.} Bf6 21.Qg4 Rce8 {? I recall that as I watched this game
from the audience which was large, even in the bucolic little
Yugoslav town that this move made little sense to me. I had
been concentrating on a different idea. 21...Qc3 was a good
move, I thought. Another spectator pointed out to me that this
could invite 22.Ne7+ ! Bxe7 23.Bd4 but it wasn't hard to see
Qxd4 24.Qxd4 Bf6 25.Qg4 Bxa1 26.Rxa1 and the question is, does
White have a change to win. It is hard to evaluate the
position. White can try to attack on the h-file or get a rook
to the seventh rank. If a pair of rooks are exchanged, then it
is likely that the White queen will be able to infiltrate and
win a pawn or too. Still, White's advantage would be pretty
small, far less than in the game. } 22.Bd2 {Now the queen
sacrifice fails for tactical reasons.} Qxa1 23.Rxa1 Bxa1
24.Nxg7 Bxg7 25.Bh6 {Najdorf resigned.} 1-0