[Event "Prague Olympiad"]
[Site "Prague CSR"]
[Date "1931.07.21"]
[EventDate "?"]
[Round "13"]
[Result "0-1"]
[White "Mario Monticelli"]
[Black "Frank James Marshall"]
[ECO "D38"]
[WhiteElo "?"]
[BlackElo "?"]
[PlyCount "54"]

1.d4 {Notes by Frank Marshall} Nf6 2.Nf3 e6 3.c4 d5 4.Nc3 Bb4
{Nowadays known as the Ragozin System, this line was played by
mysef and others long before the Russian master decided it was
good.} 5.Qb3 {5 Qa4+ Nc6 6 Ne5 O-O (or 6...Bd7 )gives White no
advantage.} c5 6.a3 {Waste of time; either 6 Bg5 or e3 is
preferable.} Bxc3+ 7.bxc3 O-O 8.Bg5 cxd4 9.cxd4 Nc6 {! Not
minding the doubled pawns which I get two moves later.}
10.cxd5 exd5 11.Bxf6 gxf6 {...Qa5+ was also good.} 12.Qc3
{Preventing ...Qa5+. At first glance White appears to have an
excellent game, in view of his opponent's disorganized pawn
structure. It soon becomes apparent, however, that this
drawback is outweighed by Black's rapid development and his
strong queen-side initiative.} Bf5 13.e3 Rc8 14.Nd2 {Of course
not 14 Bd3?? Ne5 and wins. Black's play on the c-file,
culminating in occupation of c2, soon gives him a decisive
grip on the position.} {So that if 17 O-O Rxd2.} Na5 15.Qb4
Rc2 16.Bb5 Qb6 17.Nf3 Rfc8 18.O-O a6 {! Positionally
decisive.} 19.Ba4 Rb2 {! The exchange of queens is virtually
forced, after which Black will have an easy win : two pawns to
one on the queen-side, seventh rank and occupation of the weak
white squares.} 20.Qe7 {Since this does not avoid the
exchange, and in fact only gains time for Black by making an
immediate ...b5 possible, he should have played Qxb6
directly.} Qe6 21.Qxe6 Bxe6 {21...fxe6 is desirable to round
out Black's pawns, but then 22 Nh4 is a good reply.} 22.h3 b5
23.Bd1 Rc3 {The winning move. Black forces a powerful passed
b-pawn.} 24.Nh4 Nc4 25.a4 b4 26.Bg4 b3 27.Bf5 Rd2 {White
resigns, as the b-pawn cannot be stopped. It is interesting to
reflect that the queen-side attack succeeded with all the
speed which is characteristic of a direct king-side attack!}
0-1