[Event "Manhattan CC v Marshall CC"]
[Site "New York"]
[Date "1934.??.??"]
[EventDate "?"]
[Round "?"]
[Result "0-1"]
[White "J L McCudden"]
[Black "Frank James Marshall"]
[ECO "A13"]
[WhiteElo "?"]
[BlackElo "?"]
[PlyCount "82"]

1.Nf3 {Notes by Frank Marshall} d5 2.c4 e6 3.b3 c5 4.g3 Nc6
5.Bg2 Be7 {For reasons that will be given later, this is
stronger than the more obvious ...Nf6.} 6.Bb2 Bf6 {!} 7.Nc3
Nge7 8.O-O O-O 9.Rc1 Bxc3 {! The strength of the bishop has
been demonstrated so convincingly in modern chess that this
exchange comes as a great surprise. However, it is well
motivated : Black has foreseen that after the intended
advances with ...d4 and ...e5 the king bishop would have
little scope - hence it's removal is in order. The result is
that Black retains his more effective bishop - the one moving
on the white squares. Furthermore, the strength of White's
bishops is greatly minimized by the fact that the position is
one in which bishops cannot accomplish a great deal.} 10.Rxc3
d4 11.Rc1 e5 12.d3 Bg4 13.Qd2 Qd7 14.Ba3 {? White's plan is to
break through on the queen-side with an eventual b4, but this
has little value unless precede by a3. The right course was 14
Ng5! followed by Ne4 and f4, and possibly a3 and b4 later on.}
Qd6 15.b4 {Ng5 was still available.} cxb4 16.c5 Qd7 17.Bxb4 h6
{This useful move prevents Ng5-e4-d6 and also, at some future
time, the possibly annoying Qg5. It is interesting to observe
that White's attempt to extend the scope of his queen bishop
has not succeeded.} 18.Qb2 {Instead of beginning the pressure
on the b-file at once, he would have done better to retain the
king bishop with some such move as Rfe1.} Bh3 19.Nd2 Bxg2
20.Kxg2 Nd5 21.Ba3 f5 22.Nc4 {And now he tries to get the
knight into the game, but too much time is lost thereby. It is
true that in closed positions time is not so important, yet so
great an expenditure of time may prove to be a luxury, in view
of Black's gaining strength in the center and on the
king-side.} f4 {Setting up the f-file as a valuable basis of
attack.} 23.Nd6 Rab8 24.Qb3 Qe6 25.Rb1 Kh7 26.Qc4 fxg3 {The
defensive formalities attended to, Black resumes his attack on
the king. If now 27 Nxb7 Na5! 28 Nxa5 Rb1 29 Rb1 Rxf2+ wins -
an indication of the futility of White's queen-side
activities.} 27.hxg3 {Black is now ready for the final
onslaught.} Nf4+ {!} 28.gxf4 Qg4+ {Black's attack is perfectly
sound because White's menaced king can secure no appreciable
aid from his officers, who are busily engaged in conquering
"scorched earth".} 29.Kh2 Rxf4 30.Ne4 Qh4+ 31.Kg2 Rg4+ 32.Ng3
Rf8 {! Decisive reinforcement of the attack : there is no good
reply to his next move.} 33.Rg1 Rxf2+ {!} 34.Kxf2 Qh2+ 35.Rg2
Rf4+ 36.Ke1 Qxg2 {If now 37 Ne4 Qf1+ winning the rook.}
37.Rxb7 Qxg3+ 38.Kd1 Rf1+ 39.Kc2 Qe1 {there is no defence.}
40.Rb5 Qd1+ 41.Kb2 Qb1# 0-1