[Event "Berlin"]
[Site "Berlin GER"]
[Date "1916.??.??"]
[EventDate "?"]
[Round "?"]
[Result "1-0"]
[White "Siegbert Tarrasch"]
[Black "Jacques Mieses"]
[ECO "C10"]
[WhiteElo "?"]
[BlackElo "?"]
[PlyCount "37"]

1.e4 {Notes by Nimzowitsch} e6 2.d4 d5 3.Nc3 dxe4 {Giving up
the center, but opens the d-file and the long diagonal b7 to
h1 for pressure on White's center.} 4.Nxe4 Nd7 5.Nf3 Ngf6
6.Bd3 Nxe4 {Better would be ...b6, but the text move is
playable.} 7.Bxe4 Nf6 8.Bd3 {If 8.Bg5 Be7 9.Bxf6, then best
9...gxf6.} b6 9.Bg5 Bb7 10.O-O Be7 11.Qe2 O-O 12.Rad1 h6 {?
The tenacity of purpose so necessary to tournament play fails
him here. Why not ...Qd5? If then 13.c4 Qa5 followed presently
by ...Rad8 and the pressure is already sensible. If, however,
13.c4 Qa5 14.d5, then 14...Rae8! with strong
counter-threats. For instance 15.dxe6 Bxf3 followed by
...Qxg5. Why the mere contact with the point d5 must bring a
blessing is evident. This point in the first place is the
outpost station in the Queen file, and in the second the same
thing in the diagonal b7 to h1, while lastly, d5 is a
blockading point. The enormous strategical importance to Black
of the point d5 makes it clear that any, even the most
passing, contact with it must work wonders.} 13.Bf4 Qd5 {Now
this move is unfavorable since the c-Pawn is in the air. The
inclined plane makes its appearance.} 14.c4 Qa5 15.Bxc7 Bxf3
{15...Rac8 was to be considered here, and after 16.Be5 Rfd8,
the advance of White's Pawn majority is very much hindered.}
16.gxf3 {!} Qxa2 {? Black will not resign himself to the loss
of a Pawn, runs risks in seeking compensation, and thus loses
the Queen. With 16...Rfc8 17.Be5 Nd7! (with a view to the
threatened Kh1 and Rg1), he couls still have put up
resistance. For if then 18.Bxe4, then 18...Nxe5 19.Bxa8 Ng6,
and Black threatens ...Nf4 leading to mate or win of the
Queen.} 17.Ra1 Qb3 18.Bc2 Qb4 19.Ra4 {The Queen is prettily
trapped.} 1-0