[Event "Montilla-Moriles"]
[Site "Montilla-Moriles"]
[Date "1978.08.??"]
[EventDate "?"]
[Round "2"]
[Result "1-0"]
[White "Anthony Miles"]
[Black "Boris Spassky"]
[ECO "E12"]
[WhiteElo "?"]
[BlackElo "?"]
[PlyCount "55"]

1.d4 {Notes by Raymond Keene, with excerpts from Jan Timman,
and Tony Miles. *** It was Boris Spassky who was partly
responsible for the generally awakened interest in chess after
1972. This, of course, was a consequence of his sensational
world title fight with Fischer. Six years later, the ex-world
champion was to lose a brilliant game to one of the young men
who had been inspired by the contest in Reykjavik. This great
game was played at Montilla, the so-called 'Wine Tournament'
(Torneo del Vino), August 15-24, 1978. In spite of his setback
here, Spassky still won first prize with 6 1/2 out of 9, ahead
of Miles, Gligoric and Hort on 6. At his best, Miles' style
exhibited a broad penchant for attack. A tip-top Miles game
always seemed to show him having unlimited reserves ready to
throw into the offensive, however many exchanges had taken
place beforehand. The following beautiful game against a
former world champion is, in my opinion, his best. It
demonstrates clearly not only Miles' quality of imagination
but also the relentless formation of Tsunami, or attacking
waves, which so magically appeared in his best games. } Nf6
2.Nf3 b6 3.c4 e6 4.Bf4 {"My latest anti-Nimzo-Indian
variation. It has the merit of being completely untried at
master level (consequently unanalysed) and having played it
all of three times, I am now undoubtedly the world's leading
authority on it. Indeed, after one or two more it will
probably be named after me!" -- Tony Miles. "Miles had a
patent on this system against the Queen's Indian." -- Timman}
Bb7 5.e3 Be7 {"According to Chess Encyclopaedia 5...Ne4 is
good for Black. I, of course, disagree as, it seems, do my
opponents." -- Miles. "Spassky goes for a passive set-up,
allowing White to get a clear opening advantage." -- Timman }
6.h3 {"6 Nc3 Nh5! gives Black less trouble, otherwise Black
might get the bishop pair." -- Timman} O-O 7.Nc3 d5 8.cxd5
exd5 {"8...Nxd5 9 Nxd5 Bxd5 10 Bd3 is slightly better for
White, as in Browne-Miles, Amsterdam 1978. It was probably
better to swap a couple of knights, but even then Black would
feel the pressure." -- Timman.} 9.Bd3 c5 10.O-O Nc6 {The stage
is set. White has prospects against Black's kingside, while
Spassky has chances on the other side of the board.} 11.Ne5 c4
{!? "11...cxd4 12 Nxc6 Bxc6 13 exd4+=" -- Miles} 12.Bc2 a6
13.g4 {The signal for the attack. -- Timman} b5 14.g5 Ne8 {In
the diagram, White has already burned his boats. Black has a
dangerous queenside pawn majority and, by advancing his
g-pawn, White has weakened his kingside. White has apparently
staked all on attacking Black's king, rendered somewhat
exposed by the forced retreat of the knight from f6 How should
White pursue the attack? 15 Qh5 allows Black to play ...g6 (a
move he intends to play anyway) with gain of tempo. The
obvious attacking try is 15 Bxh7+ Kxh7 16 Qh5+ Kg8 17 g6 fxg6
(17...Nf6 18 gxf7+) 18 Nxg6 but Black can then defend
satisfactorily by 18...Rf6 when 19 Nxd5 loses to 19...Rxg6+;
18...Nf6 19 Qh8+ Kf7 20 Nxf8 Qxf8 is also not bad for
Black. So Miles played 15 Qg4, a multi-purpose move,
transferring the queen to the kingside, defending the pawn on
g5, vacating d1 for a rook and eyeing d7.} 15.Qg4 g6 16.Rad1
{"White prepares his assault with natural developing
moves. The black counter-offensive on the queenside makes
little difference." -- Timman} Ng7 17.h4 Bb4 {? Up to this
point, the game had been fairly balanced, with White's
kingside attack countered by defence in depth plus a black
queenside pawn majority. But now Spassky removes a key
defensive piece, clearly miscalculating the tactics that
follow. Probably best is 17...b4 18 Ne2 f6.} 18.Nd7 {!
"Already the final blow. But it needed accurate
calculation."--Timman} Bc8 {"Forced. 18...Bxc3 19 Nf6+ Kh8 20
bxc3 followed by h5 is hopeless for Black. 18...f5 19 gxf6+/-"
-- Miles} 19.Nxd5 {"19 Nf6+? Qxf6 20 Qxc8 Qe6!=+" -- Miles}
Kh8 {"If 19...Bxd7 not 20 Nf6+, which is refuted by
20...Qxf6!, when White's queen would be hanging. Stronger
would be 20 Qxd7 Qxd7 21 Nf6+" -- Miles. This game is replete
with such delicate tactics.} 20.N5f6 Ra7 {Best. If 20...Be7 21
Be4 or 20...Ne8 21 Be5. Now White must lose the knight on d7,
but his attack becomes decisive.} 21.d5 { Now the point of
move 16 is revealed." -- Timman} Ne7 {If 21...Na5 22 h5! Rxd7
23 Qh4 gxh5 24 Be5 Re7 [24...Qe7 25 Qe4] 25 Bd4!+ -- Miles}
22.Be5 {! Now 22 h5 is not so clear, e.g. 22...Bxd7 23 Qh4
gxh5 with ...Ng6 to follow. With the point that 22...Bxd7
fails to 23 Qd4" -- Timman} Rxd7 {Not 22...Bxd7 23 Qd4!} 23.h5
{! "23 Qd4? Nc6! or 23 Nxd7? Qxd7 and ...Qg4+. The attack is
still rolling along but it still requires accurate
calculation." -- Timman. Despite exchanges the attack steadily
mounts. } Rxd5 {"23...Rb7 24 Qf4+" -- Miles} 24.Qf4 {! The
best square for the queen.} Rxd1 25.Rxd1 Qa5 {Though a piece
ahead, Black is lost. The more natural 25...Qb6 allows 26h6
when the attacked knight cannot move because of Nd5+.} 26.Ne8
{! The death blow.} f6 {Or if 26...Rxe8 27 Qf6 Rg8 (27...Nef5
28 Bxf5 Rxe5 29 h6 Bf8 30 hxg7+ Bxg7 31 Rd8++) 28 h6 mates
quickly: 28...Nef5 29 Bxf5 Bf8 30 Bxc8+.} 27.gxf6 Kg8 {If
27...Nxe8 28 f7+ or 27...Rxe8 28 f7! Rf8 29 h6 Nef5 30 Qxf5
Bxf5 31 hxg7#} 28.Nxg7 {If 28...Nc6 29 hxg6 soon forces
mate. "And Black resigned, crushed. A magnificent attacking
win, all the more considering that Spassky, together with
Karpov, had won the first Bugojno tournament earlier that
year"--Timman. Many players would find Miles' 18th or 19th
moves more impressive than his fifteenth. But these moves were
susceptible to precise calculation, whereas 15 Qg4 was not. 15
Qg4 stands out as a star move, because White displayed good
judgement in rejecting the tempting 15 Bxh7+ and correctly
chose to pursue the attack by slower means. I think this is
Miles' best game.} 1-0