[Event "Lasker - Capablanca World Championship Match"]
[Site "Havana CUB"]
[Date "1921.03.31"]
[EventDate "?"]
[Round "6"]
[Result "1/2-1/2"]
[White "Emanuel Lasker"]
[Black "Jose Raul Capablanca"]
[ECO "C66"]
[WhiteElo "?"]
[BlackElo "?"]
[PlyCount "86"]

1.e4 {Notes by J. R. Capablanca} e5 2.Nf3 Nc6 3.Bb5 Nf6 4.O-O
d6 5.d4 Bd7 6.Nc3 Be7 7.Re1 exd4 8.Nxd4 O-O 9.Bxc6 bxc6 10.Bg5
Re8 11.Qd3 h6 12.Bh4 Nh7 13.Bxe7 Rxe7 14.Qc4 {Up to this point
the game was identical with the third. Here Lasker changed the
course of the game.} Qe8 15.Re2 {Re3 had also to be
considered.} Rb8 16.b3 c5 17.Nf3 Bb5 {Not the best.Ng5 was the
right move. The text move leaves Black with an exceedingly
difficult ending.} 18.Nxb5 Qxb5 19.Qxb5 Rxb5 20.Kf1 Ng5 21.Nd2
Ne6 {The maneuvers of this knight are ofmuch greaterimportance
than it might appear on the surface. It is essential to force
White to play c3 in order to weaken somewhat the defensive
strength of his queen’s knight’s pawn.} 22.c3 f6 23.Nc4 Nf4
{Again the moves of the knight have a definite meeting. The
student would do well to carefully study this ending.} 24.Re3
Ng6 25.Nd2 Rb8 26.g3 a5 27.a4 {It is now seen why Black had to
compel White to play c3. With the white pawn at c2 Black’s
game would be practically hopeless, since White’s b pawn would
not have to be protected by a piece, as is the case now.} Ne5
28.f4 Nd7 29.Ke2 Nb6 30.Kd3 c6 31.Rae1 Kf7 32.Nc4 {e5 would
have lead to a much more complicated and difficult ending, but
Black seems to have an adequate defense by simply playing
fxe5, followed by d5, when White retakes the pawn.} Nxc4
33.Kxc4 Re6 {This is the best move and not Ke6 which would be
met by Rd3.} 34.e5 fxe5 35.fxe5 d5 36.Kxc5 Rxb3 37.c4 {Not the
best, but at any rate the game would have been a draw. The
best move would have been Rf1+.} dxc4 38.Re4 {Probably the
only way to obtain a sure draw.} c3 39.Rc4 h5 40.Re3 Rb2
41.Rcxc3 Rxh2 42.Kb6 Rb2+ 43.Kxa5 g5 {There was not any object
for either player too attempt to win such a game.} 1/2-1/2