[Event "Lasker - Capablanca World Championship Match"]
[Site "Havana CUB"]
[Date "1921.04.20"]
[EventDate "?"]
[Round "14"]
[Result "0-1"]
[White "Emanuel Lasker"]
[Black "Jose Raul Capablanca"]
[ECO "C66"]
[WhiteElo "?"]
[BlackElo "?"]
[PlyCount "112"]


1.e4 {Notes by J.R. Capablanca} e5 2.Nf3 Nc6 3.Bb5 Nf6 4.O-O
d6 5.d4 Bd7 6.Nc3 Be7 7.Bxc6 Bxc6 8.Qd3 exd4 9.Nxd4 Bd7 10.Bg5
O-O 11.Rae1 h6 12.Bh4 Nh7 13.Bxe7 Qxe7 14.Nd5 Qd8 15.c4 {White
has now a powerful position and Black has to play with extreme
care in order to avoid drifting into a hopeless position.} Re8
16.f4 c6 {This weakens the queen's pawn, but something had to
be done to obtain manouvering space for the White
pieces. Besides, with the advance of the f-Pawn, White's
king's pawn becomes also weak, which is somewhat of a
compensation.} 17.Nc3 Qb6 18.b3 Rad8 {Unnecessary. Re7 was the
proper move.} 19.Kh1 Nf6 20.h3 Bc8 21.Rd1 {This is waste of
time. In order to obain an advantage, White will have to make
an attack on the king's side, since Black's queen's pawn,
though weak, cannot be won through a direct attack against
it.} Re7 22.Rfe1 Rde8 23.Re2 Qa5 24.Rf1 Qh5 25.Kg1 a6 26.Rff2
Qg6 27.Rf3 {If 27.Nf5 Bxf5 28.exf5 Qh5 29.Rxe7 Rxe7 and Black
has a good game.} Qh5 28.f5 {Of doutbful value. While it shuts
off the bishop, it weakens furthermore the king's pawn and
also creates a hole on e5 for Black's pieces. The position at
first glance, looks very much in favor of White, but careful
analysis will show that is much more apparent than true.} Qh4
29.Kh2 {A blunder, made under time pressure combined with
difficulties attached to the position.} Ng4+ 30.Kh1 Ne5 31.Qd2
Nxf3 32.Nxf3 Qf6 {Qg3 was dangerous and might lead to the loss
of some material} 33.a4 {To prevent b5. There are a number of
variations where White would regain the quality in exchange
for a pawn had he played 33. g4, to be followed by e5 and
Ne4,but the resulting ending would be so much in favor of
Black that the course pursued by White may be considered the
best.} g6 34.fxg6 fxg6 35.Re3 Bf5 36.Qd3 {There were some very
interesting variations beginning with 36.Rd3, viz.,36...Bxe4
37.Rxd6 Qg7 38.Nh4 Bf5 39.Nxf5 gxf5 40.Rxh6 Re1+ 41.Kh2 Qe5+
42.g3 Qxc3, and White is lost.} g5 37.Nd2 Bg6 38.b4 {White's
idea is to change as many pawns as possible, hoping to reach
an ending where the advantage of the exchange may not be
sufficient to win.} Qe6 39.b5 axb5 40.axb5 Ra8 41.Qb1 Qe5
42.Qe1 Kh7 43.bxc6 bxc6 44.Qg3 Qxg3 45.Rxg3 Ra3 46.Kh2 Rb7
47.c5 {Forced, as Rb2, winning a piece, was threatened.} dxc5
48.Nc4 Ra1 49.Ne5 Rc1 {The moves of this rook are worth
studying. I believe that Black had no better way to play.}
50.h4 {This brings the game to a climax, for which Black is
now ready.} Re7 51.Nxc6 Re6 52.Nd8 gxh4 53.Rd3 Rf6 {The key to
Black's defence. The holding of the KB file.} 54.Rd7+ Kh8
55.Nd5 Rff1 56.Kh3 Bxe4 0-1