[Event "Simul, 20b"]
[Site "London ENG"]
[Date "1964.01.10"]
[EventDate "?"]
[Round "?"]
[Result "0-1"]
[White "Mikhail Tal"]
[Black "Raymond Keene"]
[ECO "B18"]
[WhiteElo "?"]
[BlackElo "?"]
[PlyCount "59"]

1.e4 {Notes by Ray Keene. I sit down to face Tal. General
expectaton: a gory loss embellished with Tal-like sacrifices.}
c6 {He plays 1.e4, I played the Caro-Kann. It was my main
defence at the time. I had just won the London under 18
championship and I had played it several times during that
event--notably against Kenny Harman. I also played Taimanov
and Lowenthal Sicilians at the time. I used the Lowenthal
against Kotov and drew, but thought this might be too
provocative against Tal.} 2.d4 d5 3.Nc3 dxe4 4.Nxe4 Bf5 5.Ng3
Bg6 6.N1e2 e6 7.h4 h6 8.Nf4 Bh7 9.Bc4 Nf6 10.O-O Nd5 {Instead,
10...Bd6 allows the famous Nxe6 sacrifice from Tal's first
match against Botvinnik which Tal was still prepared to repeat
in games as late as 1978. I wanted to avoid Tal's vastly
superior knowledge of this line so chose something to try and
dampen down White's attacking prospects.} 11.Qg4 {This is the
error, although it looks absolutely plausible. It was later
discovered that 11.Bxd5 cxd5 and now either Qg4 or Qh5 gives
White a huge attack.} Nxf4 12.Bxf4 Nd7 13.Be5 Nxe5 14.dxe5 Qc7
15.Rad1 {All this looks like vintage Tal, to keep Black's king
stuck in the centre, and my next move looks like I am
cooperating in my own demise by grabbing a hot pawn against
Tal, of all people!} Bxc2 {This almost seems like desperation
but in fact I was no longer very worried. White's c-pawn was a
very useful unit and its loss now causes White problems. My
main worry was that Tal would still find some way to sac on e6
and explode my position before I could get castled.} 16.Rd2 h5
{A decoy to gain time after 17.Nxh5 Bg6 18.Nf4 Bf5. Tal Hardly
even thought about taking the pawn and slowing down--he kept
his queen fixed on e6 where he clearly still wanted to
sacrifice.} 17.Qh3 Bh7 18.Rfd1 Bb4 19.Rd7 {The only way
forwards now, but Black's position is secure.} Qxd7 20.Rxd7
Kxd7 {So it has come to pass, and Black never got
castled. White now also starts to rip up the Black kingside,
but I was happy with two rooks for a queen and the bishop
pair, and soon some open lines too.} 21.Nxh5 Kc7 22.Nxg7 Rag8
23.Nh5 Bf5 24.Qf3 Rg4 25.Nf4 Bd2 {Now I knew I had him on the
run. Tal thought for a second and gave up his knight.} 26.Qa3
Bxf4 27.Qd6+ Kc8 28.Ba6 Be4 {Defending and attacking. White's
threats are now illusory.} 29.Qc5 Bxg2 30.Qxa7 Bh2+ {A sac
finishes White off. I was very pleased, of course, to beat Tal
in a war of movement (not just simul induced blunders) and I
felt the choice of opening had been psychologically a good
one. I was fortunately though that Tal did not discover the
probable refutation of Black's innovation with 11.Bxd5.} 0-1